TYPES OF COMPUTER NETWORKS

There are many distinct types of computer networks. This section provides an overview of a few of these networks, including those we commonly use to access
the Internet (mobile and broadband access networks); those that house the data and applications we use every day (datacenter networks); those that connect access
networks to data centers (transit networks); and those that we use on a campus, office building, or other organization (enterprise networks).Broadband Access Networks
In 1977, Ken Olsen was president of the Digital Equipment Corporation, then the number two computer vendor in the world (after IBM). When asked why Digital was not going after the personal computer market in a big way, he said: ‘‘There is no reason for any individual to have a computer in his home.’’ History showed otherwise and Digital no longer exists. People initially bought computers for word processing and games. Now the prevailing reason to buy a home computer is to get Internet access. Also, many consumer electronic devices, such as set top boxes, game consoles, television sets, and even door locks, come with embedded computers that access computer networks, especially wireless networks. Home net- works are broadly used for entertainment, including listening to, looking at, and creating music, photos, and videos. Internet access provides home users with connectivity to remote computers. As with companies, home users can access information, communicate with other people, and buy products and services. The main benefit now comes from connecting these devices to other destinations outside of the home. Bob Metcalfe, the inventor of Ethernet, hypothesized that the value of a network is proportional to the square of the number of users because this is roughly the number of different connections that may be made (Gilder, 1993). This hypothesis is known as Met calfe’s law. It helps to explain how the tremendous popularity of the Internet comes from its size. Today, broadband access networks are proliferating. In many parts of the world, broadband access is delivered to homes through copper (e.g., telephone lines), coaxial cable (e.g., cable), or optical fiber. The speeds of broadband Internet access continue to increase as well, with many broadband access providers in developed countries delivering a gigabit per second to individual homes. In some parts of the world, particularly in developing regions, the predominant mode of Internet access is mobile. Mobile and Wireless Access Networks Mobile computers, such as laptops, tablets, and smartphones, are one of the fastest growing segments of the computer industry. Their sales have already over taken those of desktop computers. Why would anyone want one? People on the go often want to use their mobile devices to read and send email, tweet, watch movies, download music, play games, look at maps, or simply to surf the Web for information or fun. They want to do all of the things they do at home and in the office. Naturally, they want to do them from anywhere on land, sea, or in the  air.
 

Connectivity to the Internet enables many of these mobile uses. Since having a wired connection is impossible in cars, boats, and airplanes, there is a lot of interest in wireless networks. Cellular networks operated by telephone companies are one familiar kind of wireless network that blankets us with coverage for mobile phones. Wireless hotspots based on the standard are another kind of wireless network for mobile computers and portable devices such as phones and tablets. They have sprung up everywhere that people go, resulting in a patchwork of coverage at cafes, hotels, airports, schools, trains, and planes. Anyone with a mobile device and a wireless modem can just turn on their computer and be connected to the Internet through the hotspot as though the computer were plugged into a wired network. Wireless networks are of great value to fleets of trucks, taxis, delivery vehicles, and repair persons for keeping in contact with their home base. For example, in many cities, taxi drivers are independent businessmen, rather than being employees of a taxi company. In some of these cities, the taxis have a display the driver can see. When a customer calls up, a central dispatcher types in the pickup and destination points. This information is displayed on the drivers’ displays and a beep sounds. The first driver to hit a button on the display gets the call. The rise of mobile and wireless networking has also led to a revolution in ground transportation itself, with the sharing economy allowing drivers to use their on phones as a dispatch device, as with ride sharing companies such as Uber and Lyft. Wireless networks are also important to the military. If you have to be able to fight a war anywhere on Earth at short notice, counting on using the local networking infrastructure is probably not a good idea. It is better to bring your own. Although wireless networking and mobile computing are often related, they are not identical. Here, we see a distinction between fixed wireless and mobile wireless networks. Even notebook computers are sometimes wired. For example, if a traveler plugs a laptop computer into the wired network jack in a hotel room, he has mobility without a wireless network. The growing pervasiveness of wireless networks is making this situation increasingly rare, although for high performance, wired networks are always better. Wireless Mobile Typical applications No No Desktop computers in offices No Yes A laptop computer used in a hotel room Yes No Networks in unwired buildings Yes Yes Store inventory with a handheld computer. Combinations of wireless networks and mobile computing. Conversely, some wireless computers are not mobile. In people’s homes, and in offices or hotels that lack suitable cabling, it can be more convenient to connectdesktop computers or media players wirelessly than to install wires. 

Installing a wireless network may require simply buying a small box with some electronics in it, unpacking it, and plugging it in. This solution may be far cheaper than having workmen put in cable ducts to wire the building. Finally, there are also true mobile, wireless applications, such as people walking around stores with handheld computers recording inventory. At many busy airports, car rental return clerks work in the parking lot with wireless mobile computers. They scan the barcodes or RFID chips of returning cars, and their mobile device,which has a builtin printer, calls the main computer, gets the rental information, and prints out the bill on the spot. A key driver of mobile, wireless applications is the mobile phone. The convergence between telephones and the Internet is accelerating the growth of mobile applications. Smartphones, such as Apple’s iPhone and Samsung’s Galaxy, combine aspects of mobile phones and mobile computers. These phones connect to wireless hotspots, too, and automatically switch between networks to choose thebest option for the user. Text messaging or texting (or Short Message Service as it is known outside the U.S.) over the cellular network was tremendously popularat its outset. 

It lets a mobile phone user type a short message that is then delivered by the cellular network to another mobile subscriber. Texting is extremely profitable since it costs the carrier but a tiny fraction of one cent to relay a text message, a service for which it charges far more. Typing short text messages on mobile phones was, for a time, an immense money maker for mobile carriers. Now, many alternatives that use either the phone’s cellular data plan or wireless network, including WhatsApp, Signal, and Facebook Messenger, have overtaken SMS.Other consumer electronics devices can also use cellular and hotspot networks to stay connected to remote computers. Tablets and electronic book readers can download a newly purchased book or the next edition of a magazine or today’s newspaper wherever they roam. Electronic picture frames can update their displays on cue with fresh images. Mobile phones typically know their own locations. 

GPS (Global Positioning System) can directly locate a device, and mobile phones often also triangulate between WiFi hotspots with known locations to determine their location. Some applications are location dependent. Mobile maps and directions are an obvious candidate as your GPS enabled phone and car probably have a better idea of where you are than you do. So, too, are searches for a nearby bookstore or Chinese restaurant, or a local weather forecast. Other services may record location, such as annotating photos and videos with the place at which they were made. This annotation is known as geotagging. Mobile phones are being increasingly used in m-commerce (mobile commerce) (Senn, 2000). Short text messages from the mobile are used to authorize payments for food in vending machines, movie tickets, and other small items instead of cash and credit cards. The charge then appears on the mobile phone bill. When equipped with NFC (Near Field Communication), technology the mobile can act as an RFID smartcard and interact with a nearby reader for payment. 

The driving forces behind this phenomenon are the mobile device makers and network operators, who are trying hard to figure out how to get a piece of the e-commercepie. From the store’s point of view, this scheme may save them most of the credit card company’s fee, which can be several percent. Of course, this plan may backfire, since customers in a store might use the RFID or barcode readers on their mobile devices to check out competitors’ prices before buying and use them to get
a detailed report on where else an item can be purchased nearby and at what price. One huge thing that m-commerce has going for it is that mobile phone users
are accustomed to paying for everything (in contrast to Internet users, who expect everything to be free). If an Internet Web site charged a fee to allow its customers
to pay by credit card, there would be an immense bellowing from the users. If, however, a mobile phone operator let its customers pay for items in a store by
waving the phone at the cash register and then tacks on a small fee for this convenience, it would probably be accepted as normal. Time will tell. The uses of mobile and wireless computers will grow rapidly in the future as the size of computers shrinks, probably in ways no one can now foresee. Let us take a quick look at some possibilities. Sensor networks have nodes that gather and relay information they sense about the state of the physical world. The nodes may be embedded in familiar devices such as cars or phones, or they may be small separate devices. For example, your car might gather data on its location, speed, vibration, and fuel efficiency from its onboard diagnostic system and upload this information to a database (Hull et al., 2006). Those data can help find potholes, plan trips around congested roads, and tell you if you are a gas guzzler compared to other drivers on the same stretch of road. Sensor networks are revolutionizing science by providing a wealth of data on behavior that could not previously be observed. One example is tracking the migration of individual zebras by placing a small sensor on each animal (Juang etal., 2002). Researchers have packed a wireless computer into a single square cubic millimeter. 

With mobile computers this small, even small birds, rodents, and insects can be tracked. Wireless parking meters can accept credit or debit card payments with instant
verification over the wireless link. They can also report when they are in use, which can let drivers download a recent parking map to their car so they can find
an available spot more easily. Of course, when a meter expires, it might also check for the presence of a car (by bouncing a signal off it) and report the expiration to
parking enforcement. It has been estimated that city governments in the U.S. alone could collect an additional $10 billion this way (Harte et al., 2000).Content Provider Networks Many Internet services are now served from ‘‘the cloud,’’ or a datacenter network. 

Modern data center networks have hundreds of thousands or millions of servers in a single location, usually in a very dense configuration of rows of racks in buildings that can be more than a kilometer long. Data center networks serve the increasingly growing demands of cloud computing and are designed to move large amounts of data between servers in the data center, as well as between the data center and the rest of the Internet. Today, many of the applications and services you use, ranging from the Web sites you visit to the cloud based document editor you use to take notes, store data in a data center network. Data center networks face challenges of scale, both for network throughput and for energy usage. One of the main network throughput challenges is the so called cross section bandwidth, which is the data rate that can be delivered between any two servers in the network. Early data-center network designs were based on a simple tree topology, with three layers of switches: access, aggregate, and core; this simple design did not scale well, and was also to be subject to faults. Many popular Internet services need to deliver content to users around the world. To do so, many sites and services on the Internet use a CDN (Content Delivery Network). A CDN is a large collection of servers that are geographically distributed in such a way that content is placed as close as possible to the users that are requesting it. Large content providers such as Google, Facebook, and Netflix operate their own CDNs. Some CDNs, such as Akamai and Cloudflare, offer hosting services to smaller services that do not have their own CDN. Content that users want to access, ranging from static files to streaming video, may be replicated in many locations across a single CDN. When a user requests content, the CDN must decide which replica it should serve to that user. This process must consider the distance from each replica to the client, the load on each CDN server, and traffic load and congestion on the network itself.Transit Networks Internet travels over many independently operated networks. The network run by your Internet service provider is typically not the same network as the one that hosts the content for the Web sites that you commonly visit. Typically, content and applications are hosted in datacenter networks, and you may be accessing that content from an access network. Content must thus traverse the Internet from the data center to the access network, and ultimately to your device. When the content provider and your ISP (Internet Service Provider) are not directly connected, they often rely on a transit network to carry the traffic between them. Transit networks typically charge both the ISP and the content provider for carrying traffic from end to end. If the network hosting the content and the access network exchange enough traffic between them, they may decide to interconnect directly. One example where direct interconnection is common is between large ISPs and large content providers, such as Google or Netflix. In these cases, the ISP and the content provider must build and maintain network infrastructure to facilitate interconnecting directly, often in many geographic locations.
 
Transit networks are traditionally called backbone networks because they have had the role of carrying traffic between two endpoints. Many years ago, transit networks were hugely profitable because every other network would rely on them (and pay them) to connect to the rest of the Internet. The last decade, however, has witnessed two trends. The first trend is the consolidation of content in a handful of large content providers, spawned by the proliferation of cloud hosted services and large content delivery networks.The second trend is the expansion of the footprint of individual access ISP networks: whereas access ISPs may have once been small and regional, many access ISPs have national (or even international) footprints, which has increased both the range of geographic locations where they can connect to other networks as well as their subscriber base. As the size (and negotiating power) of the access networks and the content provider networks continues to increase, the larger networks have come to
rely less on transit networks to deliver their traffic, preferring often to directly interconnect and rely on the transit network only as a backup. Enterprise Networks
Most organizations (e.g., companies, universities) have many computers. Each employee may use a computer to perform tasks ranging from product design to payroll. In the common case, these machines are connected on a common network, which allows the employees to share data, information, and compute resources with one another. Resource sharing makes programs, equipment, and especially data available to other users on the network without regard to the physical location of the resource or the user. One widespread example is having a group of office workers share a common printer. Many employees do not need a private printer and a high volume networked printer is often less expensive, faster, and easier to maintain than a large collection of individual printers. 

Probably, even more important than sharing physical resources such as printers and backup systems is sharing information. Most companies have customer
records, product information, inventories, financial statements, tax information, and much more online. If all of its computers suddenly went down, a bank could
not last more than five minutes. A modern manufacturing plant, with a computer controlled assembly line, would not last even five seconds. Even a small travel agency or three person law firm is now highly dependent on computer net works for allowing employees to access relevant information and documents instantly. For smaller companies, the computers may be located in a single office even a single building; in the case of larger companies, the computers and employees may be scattered over dozens of offices and plants in many countries. Nevertheless, a salesperson in New York might sometimes need access to a product inventory data- base in Singapore. 

Networks called VPNs (Virtual Private Networks) connect the individual networks at different sites into one logical network. In other words, the mere fact that a user happens to be 15,000 km away from his data should not prevent him from using the data as though they were local. This goal may be summarized by saying that it is an attempt to end the tyranny of geography. In the simplest of terms, one can imagine a company’s information system as consisting of one or more databases with company information and some number of employees who need to access them remotely. In this model, the data are stored on powerful computers called servers. Often, these are centrally housed and maintained by a system administrator. In contrast, the employees have simpler ma- chines, called clients, on their desks, with which they access remote data, for example, to include in spreadsheets they are constructing. (Sometimes we will refer to the human user of the client machine as the ‘‘client,’’ but it should be clear from the context whether we mean the computer or its user.) The client and server ma- chines are connected by a network. Note that we have shown the network as a simple oval, without any detail. We will use this form when we mean a network in the most abstract sense. When more detail is required, it will be provided. A second goal of setting up an enterprise computer network has to do with people rather than information or even computers. A computer network can provide a powerful communication medium among employees. Virtually every company that has two or more computers now has email (electronic mail), which employees generally use for a great deal of daily communication. In fact, a common gripe around the water cooler is how much email everyone has to deal with, much of it quite meaningless because bosses have discovered that they can send the same (often content free) message to all their subordinates at the push of a button.Telephone calls between employees may be carried by the computer network instead of by the phone company. This technology is called IP telephony or VoIP (Voice over IP) when Internet technology is used. The microphone and speaker at each end may belong to a VoIP enabled phone or the employee’s computer. Com- panies find this a wonderful way to save on their telephone bills. Other, much richer forms of communication are made possible by computer networks. Video can be added to audio so that multiple employees at distant locations can see and hear each other as they hold a meeting. This technique is a powerful tool for eliminating the cost and time previously devoted to travel. Desktop sharing lets remote workers see and interact with a graphical computer screen. This makes it easy for two or more people who work far apart to read and write a shared blackboard or write a report together. When one worker makes a change to an online document, the others can see the change immediately, instead of waiting several days for a letter. Such a speedup makes cooperation among far flung groups of people easy where it previously had been impossible. More ambitious forms of remote coordination such as telemedicine are only now starting to be used (e.g., remote patient monitoring) but may become much more important. It is sometimes said that communication and transportation are having a race, and
whichever wins will make the other obsolete. A third goal for many companies is doing business electronically, especially with customers and also suppliers. Airlines, bookstores, and other retailers have discovered that many customers like the convenience of shopping from home. Consequently, many companies provide catalogs of their goods and services online and take orders online. Manufacturers of automobiles, aircraft, and computers, among others, buy subsystems from many suppliers and then assemble the parts. Using computer networks, manufacturers can place orders electronically as needed. This reduces the need for large inventories and enhances efficiency.